*After 10 years of careful preparation and planning, I got into the PhD program of my dreams. After 6 months of careful preparation and planning, I got out of it. y tho?*

This is a long one, so buckle up.

## Backstory

My dad and grandfather both had PhDs and they were both professors. Both of them loved the professor lifestyle and my grandfather was rich to boot. As I was growing up it became obvious that I was a genius and so both of them decided it would make sense for me to get a PhD as well. I liked school and had two great role models and a lot of intellectual curiosity so it made a lot of sense to me too, so I decided that I would do it.

When I was in college and told people I was going to try for a PhD, they usually told me that it sucked. They all knew people who dropped out of one (or had dropped out themselves) and they said it was really hard and usually a waste of time. I brought up these concerns to my father and grandfather and was told off. On making software, my grandfather said "Building something? Anyone can do that. What you want to do is to come up with ideas." and it was true that I liked coming up with unique or elegant or cool ideas so I reluctantly agreed with him.

I did like 4 research internships and I was mostly miserable during them. I liked the day to day work and being of use to people but in my first internship the guy who was in charge of me disvalued me and after that I was hesitant to disagree with or even consult my supervisors. I figured they were all super busy and I would just be a burden. These were people who already had PhDs and were constantly churning out original research so why would they have time for me? And I hated being self directed because I felt like I didn't have enough knowledge to make even the most basic decisions. But luckily all of my internships gave me a lot of experience even though it was miserable experience, and they looked good on my resume.

I should specify right now that the subject that I wanted to get my PhD in was Machine Learning (ML). My undergraduate degree was in computer science which I loved (I liked both theoretical and applied), and I took a ton of classes dealing with linear algebra which I also loved, and which I understood was the most important math for doing machine learning. Also, I was greedy and ambitious, and machine learning was a very hyped field at that time, so it promised to satisfy my greed and ambition. It seemed like the perfect path with no flaws. As for the specifics within machine learning, I liked papers such as "Generative Adversarial Networks" which strategically used an existing construction (neural networks) to solve a unique but general new problem (generating a new example of an existing category). I was also fascinated by moving around the parameters in large parameter models into new configurations that might bring some advantage. The bottom line was, I would've been happy to tackle any problem that put me close to the models I was using, focussing on modifying and analyzing them in interesting ways and seeing what would happen.

## First Signs of Danger

I submitted my resume to like 10 schools along with a letter of interest and whatever other application materials they wanted. The letter of interest was 2 pages of words about how I wanted to change the world for the better by doing research (all true but also heavily cherrypicked), and then 1 paragraph of words about how specifically getting a PhD at that school in particular would allow me to do that. This last paragraph was often extremely difficult to write. The reason was that I would go to a school that I had heard was good at machine learning research, pull up a list of faculty members, go through each one, and not be interested in any of them. Sometimes there were one or two faculty members that seemed slightly interesting to me in an abstract sort of way, but no one that was doing the research that I had envisioned myself doing (see the paragraph above this one). There were tons of people who were applying the tools that I liked to applications I was ambivalent about, or people doing theoretical work on problems that were different than the ones I was interested in, sure, but no one "just clicked" when I read their profiles. I'm still not sure if there's a dearth of people doing this sort of work in academia (it's not the bottleneck for solving ML problems at this stage? it's hard to get published? it requires more compute than academics have access to?) or if I'm just bad at identifying what this work looks like at a glance, but whatever the reason, all 10 "final paragraphs" I wrote felt like a compromise, and not a fun compromise, either. I knew that the biggest failure mode of the PhD is that you aren't sufficiently motivated to do the work that you want to do, and none of the prospective advisors I was reading about were sparking up that motivation, so I began to worry about failing this way. Eventually I decided that I should just represent my feelings accurately in my final paragraph rather than making up research interests that weren't there, and so I said the few nice things that I had found, and hoped that, if I wasn't going to be motivated enough for a PhD, the application readers would pick up on this and reject me.

This plan worked out better than I could devise (or maybe I was rejected for other reasons?). Of the schools I applied to I was rejected by 8 of them. The ninth school was a local school and a "safety" pick that I had included so that I'd have a shred of dignity left if every other place I applied to rejected me. I don't think I would've gone there even if I had been rejected everywhere else, but I wanted to keep that option open and it was easy to get into so I applied anyway. The tenth school was quite different. It was a top ten (!) ML PhD program in the US. In fact, it was miles better than almost all of the 8 schools that had rejected me. Incredible. I was so excited. I had an interview with a man on the PhD student admissions committee, who was also interested in some of the work that I had done in one of my internships. He didn't ask hard questions and I didn't make a fool out of myself, so I was admitted and gladly accepted the offer. All the doubts I had vanished. I had gotten into a top school and I felt wanted for the first time in the whole PhD application process. I threw on my rose-colored glasses and proceeded into the next stage of my life.

## Hey Hey Hey!

As I committed to the school that had chosen me I was pulled futher into the orbit of the man who had interviewed me. Let's call him Al, but that's not his real name. He was a new faculty member at the school, and I would be joining at the start of his second year there. Because he was untenured, his primary goal was to get published as much as possible to convince the school to give him tenure, a goal that would become more and more apparent the more I interacted with him. He was recruiting me to become a part of this goal, furthering his route to tenure as I furthered my own route to the PhD.

Al's research focus was in ML for education. Don't forget that I wanted to do theoretical machine learning work and was only begrudingly willing to go down the applied path, but on the other hand I am and was passionate about education, so if I had to go applied, this seemed like an area that would be more bareable than most. My final internship during my undergraduate years had been in this area, which is why I appealed to Al. I didn't hate that internship because I felt like I was doing meaningful work on interesting problems, even if it wasn't my ideal.

The personal trait that I respected most about Al was how straightforward and unpretentious he was. Everything he said sounded like his real, unfiltered opinion rather than something constructed to convince me of something or present himself and his brand in a certain light. He was unafraid to ask and answer questions, and he seemed to be available to me whenever I wanted him -- I emailed him several times while working out the logistics of admission and I always got an email back within 15 minutes. This commitment to his students stood in stark contrast to some of the "mentors" I had had in my internships, who blew me off for days and canceled standing apointments with me after I had walked into their offices.

## The Band's Visit

I went for a weekend-long visit to the school where Al did his research, to get oriented with the place and hopefully make some connections. It was disconcerting to me because I felt like I was the "odd man out" compared to the other PhD students. The guy who I sat next to on the plane, for instance, had gotten his Master's Degree the year that I graduated from highschool, and had spent the intervening years doing research at the Paul Allen Institute for Artifical Intelligence, and both of us were entering our PhDs at the same time. A friend that I made on the visit had also been conducting research at his job for years after already having a masters. These people had knowledge and skills that I lacked, and that I was pursuing the PhD explicitly to gain access to.

Another reason I did the visit was ostensibly to scope out professors that I might be interested in working with. As expected most of them were uninteresting to me and equally uninterested in me. I dropped in on meetings with professors that I knew nothing about just to fill the time, because there were not enough professors that I was serious about to occupy it. I made conversation with a professor whose research was really cool and who I had written about in the final paragraph of that letter of interest, but I must have said something wrong because after my initial question about his work he mumbled a one-sentence answer, looked at me as if I knew nothing, and walked off. Finally, I wound up in the top floor lab of a professor who was doing work that seemed compelling and who I also got along well with on a personal level. In contrast to Al, he was an older man, but he also seemed like he was at the forefront of his field. I sat next to him at the dinner and we had an interesting conversation about some random topic AND an interesting conversation about computer science. He said he had seen my application and was keeping an eye out for me, which made my heart skip a beat.

After returning from the visit I shot Al an email asking about how I should go about narrowing down the professors that I was interested in. I told him that he was one of the ones I was looking at, and also mentioned the older fellow. In his typical fashion he replied in 15 minutes and he told me in no uncertain terms that he had admitted me so that I would do research with him, not so that I could work with anyone else. He said there might be some potential for collaborations between himself and the other guy, but in all worlds I needed to be doing research for him because that's the reason he admitted me. I was taken aback at first but at this point I didn't see any major problems with working with Al. If circumstances changed, I told myself, I would be in a better position to switch advisors or research interests once I was physicall there and had started the PhD. Easier to just start of working with Al and change things up if that wasn't working out.

## Entering Enemy Territory

When the school year started, I was fully remote and working and taking classes from inside the same house where I grew up. I made the dubious decision to take a massive courseload during my first semester. I did this in part because I was afraid of doing research and in part because I was afraid that I'd stop being good at coursework if I took a break from it (at the end of my undergraduate degree, I was very good at time management, working hard, cutting out time to think about one thing, and every other skill that could help an undergraduate CS major. I like to think my undergraduate degree was a pretty hard one, both because of my own willingness to take up a burden and because the school that I went to was notorious for difficult and demanding courses). In addition to my courseload, I was also sent papers a few times a weak by Al. I treated these papers as seriously as reading as I treated items from my classes, and I would carve out a few hours to read each one and take detailed notes on it. After I read the papers and took notes I put them in a folder on my computer to gather dust; unlike the things I was reading for my courses, I never applied the insights I gained from these papers so I usually forgot them immediately after reading. Al continued to bother me about making concrete progress but I was taking a notoriously difficult class as well as two other classes (usually PhD students only took 2 classes, or 1 if it was really hard) AND I was TAing the most time intensive TAship of my life (it's amazing how punishing a 20h/week position is if they actually make you work all 20 hours, which has only ever happened to me this once), so I felt justified in telling Al "I'm really busy, I'll work on this in the winter" several times, which he eventually came to terms with. I felt amazing every day because I was doing things in the classes that were really pushing my limits and testing my skills but I was also doing them really well. The TAship was also very meaningful, as they always are if you take the time to interact with the students. I was very satisfied with finally being able to learn the things I was learning, too; stuff that I had always wondered was being laid bare weekly.

Finally my classes finished, and after a weekend off Al and I started working on research. Luckily, my final project for the intensive class turned out to have a lot of code that was going to be useful going forward (we had planned this) so I was already off to a headstart. Al created a document for me to share my ideas and the specifics of the architectures that I was using for the problems we were solving. Our first conflict (if you don't count him trying to get me to do research during the fall) was his criticism of the level of detail that I was putting onto this document. In ML there are a few really well established



details I wanna hit:
education is actually bad for ML cause the bottleneck isn't efficiency. I wonder if AL just went there cause of low hanging fruit, contrast with anna's work actually doing good.

talk about how Al's expectations for me were totally off base and low empathy for what I'm actually equipped to do

talk about how Al's life sucked ass, and I dont feel like I deserve that

talk about how people viewed it as "problem centric" rather than "tool centric"

talk about how ML companies have more resources (?)

ultimately: all of this stuff is a symptom of publishing papers being the main goal. the papers have to appeal to the right people. the papers must be published at any cost. good is done as a side effect of the papers rather than the primary effect. what works as a paper is arbitrary and is determined by people with no skin in the game. having to come up with a positive experimental result. an application for a cool tool that dint need one, or a variation on one of your tools for your application to count. everything is formalized and legibilized. there is no freedom to play around with things, or think thoughts constnantly. academia is nothign like i thought it would be, because its a domain of status hungry munchkinning hardworking optimizers rather thanfree spirits and free thought. they push everyone else out and that's why legibility sucks. thank you.
