*Memorizing the order of a deck of cards quickly is a very easy skill to acquire. With no prior experience I taught myself to do it in a night.*

## What?

I watched a bunch of youtube videos and read popscience articles saying that it's easy to memorize a deck of cards if you do it a certain way. There's also a major book about this (and other memorization feats) called "Moonwalking with Einstein". I wondered how easy the steps in the articles and videos were to pull off though, so I tried it myself (no experience with memorizing things) and figured out it's really easy.

## How?

You need to come up with a "memory palace" which is a location that you know really well and can walk through in your mind at a high level of detail. The idea is that you can put different things in different rooms, too. Initially I tried coming up with a memory palace from my mind or using a larger building that would be bigger and thus I could fit more things in it. But you really should prioritize a location that you are already very familiar with, since that's about a billion times more important than anything else. My childhood house which I lived in from ages 9 through 18 was what I ended up using.

Then I had to assign 18 different locations in the house where a person could exist. Luckily there's a pretty easy and natural way to traverse the whole house, in my case, so I just traversed it in that order, assigning numbers sequentially to each location I came upon where a person could stand or sit. For smaller rooms I put just one location but for larger rooms or rooms with multiple furniture I put multiple locations (for example in the bathroom, I put location 6 in the bath and location 7 on the toilet).

The next thing to do is to come up with associations for each card. Each one should be associated with a person, an object, and an action. I couldn't think of an easy way to do this until I realized that I had recently played the "Danganronpa" video game series, which has 48 characters and each of them has a special talent. Also the characters in the three games are "expies" of one another which means there are clear parallels between them. For example in all three games there's a smug "rival" character, who I assigned to the King (clubs for the first game, diamonds for the second, spades for the third). Boom. Also each of these guys has a different talent (being rich in the first game, being lucky in the second game, being a liar in the third game) so I made making money, getting lucky, and lying about something the actions that I associated with those three kings. I did a similar thing for the objects, and then I repeated for all the other suits. I just picked cards that worked as a schelling point (for example I picked king for the rival archetype cause they're smarter than every other character, thus the leader, thus king), to make them easier to remember.

Unfortunately there are only three Danganronpa games, so I was forced to theme the Hearts suit off of "Umineko No Naku Koro Ni", another game I like. It features a large family with a strict hierarchy starting at the family head and going down to the wife of the youngest son so it was easy for me to just assign each of the hearts in order from king to two, to the family members in rank order (I made the Ace into another character from that game). I then assigned the hearts actions and objects based on the actions and objects I associate with each of these characters, and I was finished.

To memorize the deck I just walked through the house, visualizing a person doing an action with an object in each location, based on the cards in the deck. So if the first three cards were King of Clubs, 9 of Hearts, 8 of Hearts, I'd visualize Byakuya Togami (King of Clubs) punching (9 of Hearts) a pair of glasses (8 of Hearts) on the couch in the study of the house where I grew up. Then I proceeded through the other 17 locations and memorized. To recall, I just walked through the house again. As you can imagine the things I visualized wound up being evocative and easy to remember. I literally never had trouble memorizing any of the things that I placed in the house, whatsoever. The only thing I had trouble memorizing was the associations between people, actions, objects, and cards. Therefore, I made a cheat sheet where I could look up the stuff I associated with each card, but I only looked at it when I couldn't figure something out. After a few rounds of practicing, I no longer needed it.

One thing I noticed which surprised me is how much faster I got at recalling the hearts suit (in either direction) compared to the other suits. For any suit when I went from card to character I would first have to recall what game it was from (the heart suit's game being the most different and thus easiest to remember). Then for the other suits I'd have to recall which archetype the card followed after, and then the name of that game's version of that archetype. The archetypes made some sense but ultimately I was pretty slow to recall them. In contrast, if I didn't instantly recall the hearts character, I just had to recall the character right before or right after them in order and then just work my way down or up, which was very easy. I found myself becoming noticeably faster on the hearts memorization AND recall, as a result, and I could also feel my hearts associations becoming instinctive faster than the other suits, too.

## Why?

This skill is mostly useless and after the novelty of doing it like five times without looking at my sheet I got bored of it and haven't done it in like 3 months. If I did it again I would make a new cheat sheet and associations based on something easier to memorize, maybe an ordered category since the hearts were so much faster than the other suits. I think it would be fucking sick and make me look like a genius if I just happened to memorize a complicated card order when I was randomly playing a cardgame in a social setting, so that's the main reason I would ever practice this skill. But I'm never going to play a cardgame unless someone forces me too so I probably never will.
